---
title: Agenda of the ninth `MFront` User Meeting
author: Thomas Helfer, Maxence Wangermez
date: 02/10/2023
toc: true
toc-depth: 1
numbersections: true
lang: en-EN
geometry:
- paper=a4paper
- margin=2cm
link-citations: true
colorlinks: true
figPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
tabPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
secPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
eqnPrefixTemplate: "($$i$$)"
bibliography: bibliography.bib
csl: iso690-numeric-en.csl
---

<!--
pandoc -f markdown+tex_math_single_backslash --filter pandoc-crossref --citeproc talks.md -o talks.pdf
-->

# Back to basics: an introduction to `MFront` through isotropic Domain Specific Languages (DSL)

- Maxence Wangermez
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LSC, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.
- Thomas Helfer
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LSC, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.

**Keywords**: MFront tutorial, isotropic Behaviours

This introductory talk to `MFront` aims to provide an overview of the
basics of MFront, as well as a set of best practices through a simple,
concrete modeling example.

This presentation, addressed to both novices and experienced users,
focuses on the description of isotropic (visco-)plastic behavior laws
and their implementation in the MFront software, using dedicated parsers
for this particular type of material behavior modeling.

In this presentation, detailed information will be given on how `MFront`
simplifies the creation of material models using DSLs dedicated to
isotropic models, focusing on the following points:

- A detailed analysis of MFront's syntax and functionality for defining
  isotropic material behavior.
- A practical example of the implementation of material models using
  MFront, illustrating how the software can be used to specify isotropic
  behaviour laws.
- The use of the generated libraries and their use with numerical
  simulation tools.

# Overview of `TFEL-4.2` and `MGIS-2.2`.

- Thomas Helfer
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LMCP, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.
- Maxence Wangermez
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LMCP, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.

Version `4.2` of `TFEL` is meant to stabilize the `4.x` branches before
a new development cycle that will start next year with the `5.x` branch
(based on `C++-20`). So does Version `2.2` of `MGIS`.

Evolutions are focused on new features required by projects support
`TFEL` developments, porting to GPUs of the `TFEL/Math` and
`TFEL/Material` library, bugs fixing, and documentation.

See this page for a full description:
<https://thelfer.github.io/tfel/web/release-notes-4.2.html>

The first chapters of the upcoming MFront book will be presented.

This talk will focus on some of these developments to illustrate their
impact on end users and on solvers, notably those based on `MGIS`.

# First experiences with `MFront` and `MGIS` on GPUs

- Salem Khellal
  - DRF/UGP-MS
- Thomas Helfer
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LMCP, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.
- Raphaël Prat
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LDOP, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.
- Yushan Wang
  - DRF/UGP-MS
- Lionel Gélébart
  - CEA Saclay, ISAS, DES, DRMP, SRMA, LC2M, France.

Graphical Processing Units have attractive raw numerical performances,
but can perform poorly in case of complex kernels, such as standard
mechanical behaviours.

A key point is the fact that the behavior integration must be performed
on a batch of integration points. This requires a deeper integration of
`MFront` and `MGIS`. As a consequence, the first targets are FFT
solvers, such as `AMITEX_FFTP`, as:

- The structure of codes based on Fast Fourier Transform allows a clear
  and an natural separation behaviour integration step from the rest of
  the code, which is not the case in most FEM based solver.
- The effectiveness of FFT-based methods to solve equilibrium equations,
  is such that, for non-linear behaviors, a significant part of the
  simulation time time is spent in the behaviour step.

This talk describes our experiences in porting mechanical behaviours
implemented using the `TFEL/Math` and `TFEL/Material` libraries to GPU
devices. The implementations used are slightly modified versions of
implementations generated by `MFront` to avoid some CPUs specific
features, such as exception handling. We show that the `TFEL/Math` and
`TFEL/Material` libraries can be readily used in various GPU parallel
programming model such as `cuda`, `kokkos` and `sycl`.

The talk exhibits some early and interesting results for small-strain
isotropic (visco-)plastic behaviours, the integration of which can be
reduced to a scalar Newton resolution. More complex cases are then
described. Solutions to handle behaviours requiring pre- and
pos-processing steps (such as orthotropic and/or finite strain
behaviours) will be discussed.

The talk concludes on some early thoughs and proposals about integration
in FEM based solvers.

# Multiphysics modelling of bonding/debonding phenomena at the pellet-cladding interface in nuclear fuels

- Sébastien D'andréa
  - CEA Cadarache, DES, IRESNE, DEC, SESC, LECIM, 13 108 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France
- Stéphane Lejeunes
  - CNRS, Centrale Marseille, LMA - Laboratoire de Mécanique et d'Acoustique, Marseille, France 
- Frédéric Lebon
  -  Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, LMA - Laboratoire de Mécanique et d'Acoustique, Marseille, France 
- Victor Blanc
  - CEA Cadarache, DES, IRESNE, DEC, SESC, LECIM, 13 108 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France
- Thomas Helfer
  - CEA Cadarache, DES, IRESNE, DEC, SESC, LMCP, 13 108 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France
- Marc Lainet
  - CEA Cadarache, DES, IRESNE, DEC, SESC, LEVA, 13 108 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France

**Keywords**: multiphysics coupling, thermo-chemo-mechanical behaviour, bonding interface, elastic damage, standard materials, nuclear fuel.

In the framework of bonded bodies' multiphysics simulation, we proposed
a fully coupled thermo-chemo-mechanical cohesive zone model (CZM). The
fully coupled CZM is used for simulating bonding formation, progressive
damage up to fracture and friction at the interface of bonded solids
under mechanical and thermal cyclic loadings. The mechanical loadings
combine tension or compression and shear loadings. The main purpose of
this work is to study the influence of the CZM building and the
couplings between each physics on the model ability to reproduce the
above-mentioned phenomena. The constitutive modelling is performed in
full compliance with the thermodynamic principles and with the aim to
apply later this modelling on several studies of bonded bodies.

The bonding formation is modelled with an increase of interface
stiffness and critical fracture energy in tension and shear. The
interface stiffness evolution is enabled by the introduction of a new
internal variable that describes the evolution of chemical reactions at
the interface under thermomechanical loadings. On top of that, the
proposed model describes the thermal flux at the interface as a function
of damage and bonding. This thermal flux is formed of the three modes of
heat transfer: conduction, convection and radiation. In finite element
modelling, the initial gap between solids and non-solid penetration are
taken into account with a unilateral contact algorithm. The formulation
is very general and hence admits arbitrary geometries and materials.

This work is part of a multiphysics modelling of fuel cladding (mixed
oxide - stainless steel) interface in sodium fast nuclear reactors. In
this work, various monotonic and cycling loadings are studied in order
to show the main features of the model and the differences with other
existing models.

# Usage of `MGIS` in `Manta`: a case of study

- Thomas Helfer
  - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LMCP, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.
- Olivier Jamond
  - CEA Saclay, ISAS, DES, DM2S, SEMT, DYN, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
- Olivier Fandeur
  - CEA Saclay, ISAS, DES, DM2S, SEMT, LM2S, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

`Manta` is developped at CEA to be a new generation software for the
numerical simulation in mechanics geared toward HPC
[@jamond_manta_2022]. `Manta` is meant to be the successor of
`Europlexus` and `Cast3M`.

`MGIS` is one of the basis of the so-called end-user API of `Manta`.

Strongly inspired by the `licos` solver of the `Pleiades` platform
[@helfer_licos_2015;@michel_two_2021], `MGIS` provides the relevant
information to build a dependency graph between models (mechanics, heat
transfer, etc.).

This dependency graph is used to check the consistency of the
computation. Missing dependencies can be resolved using information
provided by the user about the materials or the loadings to which the
physical system of interest is subjected.

This talk highlights the role of `MGIS`, associated with this
dependencies management algorithm, in providing a streamlined user
experience, in particular for complex nonlinear multiphysics
simulations.

# Towards an `MFront`-based framework for the constitutive modelling of concrete at high strain rates 

- Pascal Bouda
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Service d’Etudes Mécaniques et Thermiques, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
- Stanislas de Lambert
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Service d’Etudes Mécaniques et Thermiques, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

**Keywords**: Concrete, Fast transient dynamics, Sympy, Mtest

For more than ten years, the *Laboratoire d'études de DYNamique* lab at
CEA has gathered an in-house knowledge about mesoscale constitutive
modelling of concrete at high strain rates through Europlexus
[@europlexus-website], which is a finite element software dedicated to
fast-transient dynamics.

Across the years, the continuous developements
[@Guilbaud2017,@Guilbaud2021] have tried to make it compatible with both
experimental and literature results. This was done by adding/modifying
the activated mechanisms models (plasticity, damage, strain-rate
sensitivity ...). However, there have been no specific efforts done in
order to guarantee quality, or to improve code versatility for other
uses than simulations, such as constitutive parameters sensititivity
analysis with a thirdparty software or constitutive parameters
identification.

This talk depicts the first step of a reimplementation of the
constitutive laws though `MFront` which embeds a more flexible framework
to improve constitutive equations integration accuracy, robustness,
computational efficiency and portability. As the equations involved are
strongly nonlinear, we propose an innovative way to derivate the
numerical scheme, based on symbolic calculations with the `SymPy`
[@Sympy2017] library. After introducing the strategy, verification tests
are performed to assess the implementation.

# Microstructure-based modelling of snow viscoplasticity using FFT simulations and `MFront` to model crystal plasticity

- Louis Védrine
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Université de Toulouse, Méteo-France,
    CNRS, CNRM, Centre d’Études de la Neige, Grenoble, France
  - Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, DER Génie Civil et
    Environnement, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
- Antoine Bernard 
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Université de Toulouse, Méteo-France,
    CNRS, CNRM, Centre d’Études de la Neige, Grenoble, France
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble-INP, CNRS, IRD, Institut des
    Géosciences de l’Environnement, Grenoble, France
- Pascal Hagenmuller 
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Université de Toulouse, Méteo-France,
    CNRS, CNRM, Centre d’Études de la Neige, Grenoble, France
- Lionel Gélébart
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Service de Recherches Métallurgiques
    Appliquées, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette,France
- Maurine Montagnat 
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Université de Toulouse, Méteo-France,
    CNRS, CNRM, Centre d’Études de la Neige, Grenoble, France
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble-INP, CNRS, IRD, Institut des
    Géosciences de l’Environnement, Grenoble, France
- Henning Loewe
  - WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research, SLF, Flueelastr. 11,
    7260 Davos Dorf, Switzerland
  - Université Grenoble Alpes, Université de Toulouse, Méteo-France,
    CNRS, CNRM, Centre d’Études de la Neige, Grenoble, France

![Main workflow. (a) Schematic diagram of the setup associated to the
load controlled test (top) and strain-rate controlled test (bottom). (b)
Sub-volume on which the simulation was performed: ice-air segmentation
for the homogeneous model (top), grain segmentation for the sintered
crystals model (bottom).(c) Numerical set-up and boundary
conditions.](img/Im_intro_snow.png ""){#fig:snow width=95%}

**Keywords**: Porous material, Crystal plasticity, Microstructure, X-ray tomography, FFT simulations

The porous structure of snow densifies with time under gravity.
Knowledge of snow settlement is essential for many applications such as
paleoclimatology and avalanche forecasting [@Vionnet2012]. Snow
densification is mainly driven by the creep of the ice matrix undergoing
viscoplastic deformation. Although the macroscopic behaviour has been
previously explored through experiments, little is known about the
driving mechanism at the microscale and the influence of the
microstructure and crystalline texture on snow viscosity.

In this study, we modelled the elasto-viscoplastic behaviour of snow
based on 3D images of its microstructure and the mechanical properties
of ice (Fig. @fig:snow). We conducted the simulations with a Fast Fourier
Transform-based numerical solver (`AMITEX_FFTP`, available at
https://amitexfftp.github.io/AMITEX/index.html) to avoid the complex
meshing procedure and benefit from high-performance computing
facilities. We used two different viscoplastic models for ice at the
microscale. The ice matrix in the snow is either considered (i) a
homogeneous structure of polycrystalline ice modelled with a 3D
Norton-Hoff law [@Suquet1993] or (ii) a heterogeneous structure composed
of sintered crystals on which each dislocation plane can be modelled.
The behaviour law was implemented in the `MFront` code generation tool
for the second model by adapting the Méric-Cailletaud single crystal
behaviour brick to the crystal plasticity model for ice
[@Lebensohn2009]. For the first time, this work simulates the behaviour
of snow on a crystalline scale, enabling us to identify the possible
dominant deformation mechanisms.

We compared our numerical experiments to oedometric compression tests
captured by tomography [@Bernard2022b]. The model reproduced the
increase of viscosity driven by the measured structural changes induced
by the progressive settlement. The simulations are closer to the
experiments when ice is considered a heterogeneous set of ice crystals
rather than homogeneous polycrystalline ice. The numerical experiments
on the crystal plasticity model also revealed that the strain is highly
localized in the ice matrix, 5 % of the microstructure reaches a
vertical stress value higher than 58 times the macroscopic loading. In
addition, the strain is driven only by the basal slip system, which
represents 99% of the plastic deformation. Overall, this study
contributes to developing improved formulations of snow settlement in
detailed snowpack simulation tools. It provides a tool to perform
mechanical numerical experiments on various snow microstructural
patterns.

# Anisotropic damage and gradient-enhanced Eikonal regularization for quasi-brittle materials

- Breno Ribeiro Nogueira
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LMPS - Laboratoire de Mécanique Paris-Saclay, France
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Service d’études mécaniques et thermiques, France
  - Università degli Studi del Molise, DiBT, Campobasso, Italie
- Giuseppe Rastiello
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Service d’études mécaniques et thermiques, France
- Cédric Giry
  - Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LMPS - Laboratoire de Mécanique Paris-Saclay, France
  - EPF École d'ingénieurs, 55, avenue du Président Wilson, F-94230, Cachan, France
- Carlo Callari
  - Università degli Studi del Molise, DiBT, Campobasso, Italie

**Keywords**: anisotropic damage, gradient-enhanced, Eikonal non-local, quasi-brittle materials.

Isotropic damage models (e.g., [@MAZ84]) have proved to be
successful in modeling one-dimensional problems or giving an
approximation of three-dimensional damage in the case of proportional
loading [@LEM05]. However, damage in concrete is essentially
anisotropic due to some well-known behaviors: strong dissymmetry between
tension and compression, unilateral effect, induced anisotropy, etc.
Damage is considered to have preferential directions to occur, and this
should be described conveniently by tensors instead of a single scalar
variable [@STE99].

Many authors have proposed to work with second-order tensors
([@COU82;@LAD83;@MUR88;@HAL98;@DES15]), restricting damage to
orthotropic behaviors. Concerning quasi-brittle materials, this
assumption is consistent with the phenomenological observations of
cracks perpendicular or parallel to the load direction [@CHA09].

From a numerical point of view regarding finite element analysis, all
the constitutive relations mentioned above hold for a Gauss quadrature
point. However, as already well known, simulations at the structure
scale with such models will inevitably give mesh-dependent results if no
regularization technique is applied. Non-local damage models of integral
[@pijaudiercabot_nonlocal_1987] and gradient-enhanced [@PEE96] type have
been used for recovering objectivity. Nevertheless, these methods are
not capable of reproducing realistic cracking behavior, which is mainly
attributed to damage diffusion, initiation and attraction to boundaries
[@geers_strain-based_1998;@simone_incorrect_2004;@pijaudier-cabot_non-local_2004;@krayani_boundary_2009;@pijaudier-cabot_non_2010;@ribeiro_nogueira_one-dimensional_2022].
These drawbacks are related to the fact that the interactions are
considered constant and isotropic in the classic approaches.

To solve this issue, a new class of non-local evolving interactions (or
transient internal length) models was developed.
[@geers_strain-based_1998] proposed one of the first evolving
interactions models, where the gradient parameter was supposed to vary
in function of the strain but remained isotropic. [@DESGAT07]
proposed an internal time integral formulation, introducing some
internal length depending on the damage field, which could eventually be
anisotropic. Isotropic damage-dependent evolving interactions were
considered in [@poh_localizing_2017], where the micromorphic
framework is used to derive a similar gradient-enhanced model.
[@GIR11] developed a stress-based evolving interactions integral
model, which could better deal with free boundaries. A gradient-enhanced
version of such an anisotropic interactions approach was developed in
[@vandoren_modeling_2018]. [@negi_localizing_2020] proposed an
anisotropic transient-gradient approach based on
[@poh_localizing_2017], coupling the effect of damage and stress
fields in the interactions. Other evolving interactions models exist
(e.g., [@pijaudier-cabot_non-local_2004;@nguyen_damage_2011]), and
the common point of all these approaches is that damage is still
considered as an isotropic variable at the behavior level (i.e., a
scalar quantity).

![Example of the first damage eigenvalue $D_1$ color map for the L-shape
test and equivalent crack obtained by post-processing
techniques.](img/breno.pdf){#fig:Lshape_damage width=75%}

Classic non-local models (i.e., with constant internal length) have
already been applied to anisotropic damage models. For instance,
[@DES_et_al_07_EFM] used the conventional non-local integral
approach coupled to a second-order damage tensor constitutive relation.
[@kuhl_anisotropic_2000] used a classic gradient-enhanced model
(based on the strain tensor) to regularize the anisotropic microplane
formulation for quasi-brittle materials. A simplified gradient-enhanced
regularization of microplane models was proposed in
[@zreid_regularization_2014], where a scalar quantity is considered
in the regularization instead of the strain tensor.

In this work, we propose to couple an evolving anisotropic interactions
gradient-enhanced (ENLG) regularization [@DESGAT15] to an
anisotropic damage constitutive behavior [@DES15]. The main idea is
that the anisotropic behavior in quasi-brittle materials, such as
concrete, is induced by damage, while the medium is considered initially
isotropic. The induced anisotropy is therefore considered through the
ENLG model, where non-local interactions naturally evolve from isotropic
to anisotropic in function of a damage-dependent Riemannian metric. The
numerical implementation is developed in an in-house finite element code
at CEA Saclay based on the FreeFem finite element solver. An implicit
algorithm scheme implemented within the `MFRONT` tool ensures
behavior integration at quadrature points, while the communication with
the global finite element solver is handled through `MGIS`.
Theoretical and practical aspects are discussed through analyzing
numerical simulations (Figure @fig:Lshape_damage) in two and
three-dimensional contexts.

## Acknowledgments {.unnumbered}

B. Ribeiro Nogueira was supported by a public grant overseen by the
French National research Agency (ANR) as part of the "Investissements
d’Avenir" program, through the "ADI 2021" project funded by the IDEX
Paris-Saclay, ANR-11-IDEX-0003-02. G. Rastiello was partly supported by
the SEISM Institute (<http://www.institut-seism.fr>).

# Analyse sismique d’un canal par une approche dynamique transitoire simplifiée

- Grégory COUBARD
  - EDF Hydro - Centre d'Ingénierie Hydraulique.
  - Direction Technique - Service Géotechnique et Ouvrages Souterrains
 
La sûreté des digues et barrages est périodiquement réanalysée dans le
cadre d’études de dangers réglementaires. Celles-ci s’appuient sur des
études de stabilité dont les situations de chargement sont définies par
arrêté ministériel. La situation sismique doit ainsi être justifiée par
le calcul pour les ouvrages de grande importance (classes A & B) situés
en zone de sismicité 3 et plus.

Conformément aux recommandations de la profession, EDF applique le
principe d’approche graduée pour la justification de ces ouvrages allant
d’une approche pseudo-statique à une approche dynamique transitoire
simplifiée découplant la réponse dynamique de l’ouvrage de l’estimation
des déplacements induits. Des développements ont été réalisés ces
dernières années par la R&D d’EDF afin d’implémenter ce dernier type
d’approche dans `code_aster`: loi d’Iwan développée dans l’environnement
`MFront` (présentation au Club-U Mfront en 2016) permettant de décrire la
réponse dynamique des sols, et macro-commande `POST_NEWMARK` permettant
d’estimer les déplacements irréversibles induits. La première
utilisation industrielle de ce développement sur un canal a montré tout
son intérêt avec la justification des derniers profils critiques.

# Intégration de `MGIS`/`MFront` dans `MEF++`: interface et cas d'utilisations

- David Siedel
  - Michelin, Centre de Recherche de Ladoux, 63118, Cébazat, France
- Arthur Geromel-Fischer
  - Michelin, Centre de Recherche de Ladoux, 63118, Cébazat, France
- Eric Chamberland
  - Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Recherche en Éléments Finis de
    l’Université Laval, Départment de Mathématiques et Statistiques,
    Université Laval, Québec, Canada

Dans le cadre d'une approche *tout durable*, Michelin tire profit de son
expertise et de sa capacité d'innovation dans le domaine des matériaux
composites flexibles afin d'étendre son activité au délà du pneumatique.
Ainsi, la conception de nouveaux matériaux et la modélisation de leur
comportement sont plus que jamais au coeur de l'activité du groupe. Afin
d'accompagner cette transformation, des développements sont menés pour
favoriser la portabilité et la modularité des outils de modélisation des
matériaux.

Dans ce contexte, la suite `MGIS`/`MFront` a récemment été intégrée au
solveur éléments finis `MEF++` [@mefpp], co-développé par le laboratoire
GIREF de l'Université Laval et par Michelin, avec un double objectif:

- permettre aux concepteurs matériaux d'appeler des lois de comportement
  externes au solveur, et utilisables dans des environnements variés
  (prototypage, ajustement de paramètres, etc.)
- favoriser la collaboration autour de la modélisation des matériaux et
  des structures avec des partenaires industriels et académiques

Cette présentation expose les choix d'implémentation retenus pour
appeler des lois de comportement `MFront` dans le solveur `MEF++`. Des cas
de validation et d'utilisation sont ensuite présentés, et des
perspectives de développement pour étendre la gamme des scénari
d'utilisation de `MFront` à Michelin sont finalement proposées.

# A temperature-dependent constitutive model for argillaceous hard soils - weak rocks

- Miguel A. Mánica
    - Institute of Engineering, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.
- Eric Simo
    - BGE TECHNOLOGY GmbH, Peine, Germany.
- Philipp Herold
    - BGE TECHNOLOGY GmbH, Peine, Germany.
- Thomas Helfer
    - CEA Cadarache, IRESNE, DES, DEC, SESC, LSC, 13 108 St Paul lez Durance, France.
- Thomas Nagel
    - Technical University of Bergakademie Freiberg, Freiberg, Saxony, Germany.

**Keyword**: MFront, OpenGeosSys, temperature dependence, THM analysis.

This talk describes the implementation of a constitutive model through
`MFront` to characterise the behaviour of argillaceous hard soils - weak
rocks. Particularly, the model is intended to be used in the finite
element code `OpenGeoSys`, to perform coupled thermo-hydro-mechanical
analyses of underground excavations in the context of deep geological
nuclear waste disposal. Special emphasis is placed on the effect that
variations of temperature have on the behaviour of these indurated
clayey materials.

As identified in previous experimental research, heating saturated clays
under drained conditions induces volume changes that depend on the
stress history. Normally consolidated clays exhibit thermo-plastic
contraction, while overconsolidated and indurated clayey materials show
an initial thermo-elastic expansion, followed, at some threshold
temperature, by irreversible contractive strains. On the other hand, the
strength generally decreases as temperature increases. The implemented
constitutive model accounts for the variation of mechanical properties
to reproduce the observed behaviour, including the expansion-contraction
transition identified in stiff clays. The latter is achieved in the
context of multi-surface plasticity, where deviatoric and volumetric
yield surfaces are assumed to depend on temperature. Some validation
examples are presented, where laboratory tests with temperature
variations are simulated both from a constitutive standpoint, with the
`MTest` tool, and as a coupled THM boundary value problem in
`OpenGeoSys`.


# References